[New] Add proposal for memory and execution model (#47)
hlsl-tc57/tc57: proposals/NNNN-mem-and-exec-model.md

---
title: NNNN - Formalized Memory and Execution Model
params:
  authors:
  - llvm-beanz: Chris Bieneman
  sponsors:
  - llvm-beanz: Chris Bieneman
  status: Under Consideration
---

## Introduction

This proposal seeks to define the memory and execution models for HLSL. The goal
is to define a memory and execution model that is understandable to users,
portable across a wide variety of GPU hardware, and strikes a balance between
full portability and performance.

## Motivation

The HLSL and DXIL memory and execution model have never been fully defined. This
forces reliance on Windows device certification for behavior conformance, and a
general approach that the implementation defines the behavior.

This state is not ideal from the start, however as HLSL becomes more widely

> portable, and DirectX moves to SPIRV the lack of a documented memory and

Reviewer: Comma not needed for a single and. Needed for the dependent clause.
```suggestion
portable and DirectX moves to SPIR-V, the lack of a documented memory and
```

execution model makes it near impossible to ensure portability across byte code
formats.

The SPIRV-defined memory and execution model is constantly evolving and seeking
to address some of the specific problems discussed in this proposal, however
SPIRV is not designed to be written by humans. It is not a requirement that
HLSL's memory and execution models match SPIRV, just that SPIRV is expressive

> enough to model programs in the model defined by HLSL.

Reviewer: Given that this is an HLSL spec, perhaps the onus should be placed on HLSL here. Where SPIR-V is unable to express what HLSL needs, changes will need to be made, but it might be better suited to this document to say something like 
```suggestion
SPIR-V is not designed to be written by humans. It is not a requirement that
HLSL's memory and execution models match SPIR-V, just that the HLSL model can be
expressed using SPIR-V.
```
It leaves open that SPIR-V might change, but also that HLSL needs to "fit" into it one way or another.

Also, I think we should spell it SPIR-V in formal documents

Reviewer 2: @pow2clk you probably want to amend that last reference to "SPIRV"?

Reviewer: Yes, thanks!

This proposal is structured with multiple proposed solutions. Those will become
_Alternatives Considered_ as they are eliminated from consideration. There are
also two groupings of proposals to capture the execution and memory models
separately although they are tightly connected in the final representation.

## Execution Model Proposals

All execution model proposals assume behaviors documented in
[SPV_KHR_maximal_reconvergence](https://github.com/KhronosGroup/SPIRV-Registry/blob/main/extensions/KHR/SPV_KHR_maximal_reconvergence.asciidoc),
as well as additional reconvergence requirements for `OpSwitch` to match the
DXIL `switch` behavior such that tangles are formed by branch target (not
selector value), and tangles are expected to reconverge at labels in the event
of fall through.

### Proposed solution #1 : Full Lockstep

A full lockstep execution model is the simplest to understand. Under full

> lockstep, all the threads in a warp must behave as if they share the same

Reviewer 2: nit: s/warp/wave?

Reviewer: That is what HLSL calls it

Author: > nit: s/warp/wave?

Fixed. HLSL does normatively use the term "wave" rather than "warp".

program counters which only need to synchronize across tangles at designated
sync points (e.g. wave operations, barriers, etc).

Under this model the [example from solution #2](#example2) is undefined because
the program contains no synchronization points, so each thread can execute
independently and the memory ordering is not guaranteed.

To illustrate a particular challenge with this model, consider the following
example:

<a name="example3"></a>

```hlsl
groupshared int X;

[numthreads(4,1,1)]
void main(uint GI : SV_GroupIndex) {
  if (GI == 0)
    X = 0;
  GroupMemoryBarrierWithGroupSync(); // sync point!
  if (X == 0)
    X = 2; // How many threads are in the tangle here?
}
```

One problem with this model is not having clearly defined memory ordering which
can impact tangle formation. If a thread is allowed to execute the second `if`
body before all threads have finished evaluating the condition, tangle formation
becomes unintuitive and potentially undefined.

This can be made slightly stricter by requiring that branch statements (`if`,
`else`, `switch`, `for`, `while`, etc.) are thread sync points. It also likely

> requires atomic operations to behave a sync points as well.

Reviewer 3: We prefer this, or Vulkan perf will be nerfed.

Sure we've ran into problem with it before 
https://graphics-programming.org/blog/subgroup-shuffle-execution-dependency-on-nvidia

But this is why SPIR-V gives you a subgroup execution barrier which you can liberally pepper around

Reviewer 2: Making branch statements implicitly have the equivalent of a Vulkan subgroup control barrier makes sense to me, since that's more or less the time you want to use it to avoid weird interactions with hoisting letting memory accesses escape the tangle.

I'm not clear why you'd want atomics to be a sync point though - what's the motivation for this?

Reviewer 3: whats the  opt out meachism from getting implicit subgroup control barrier and maximal reconvergence on all shaders and not have my Nvidia performance get nerfed due  to not being able to use IPC ?

> I'm not clear why you'd want atomics to be a sync point though - what's the motivation for this?

If you're referencing our blogpost it was an NV compiler bug.

AFAIK subgroup shuffle shuffles registers around, and due to IPC register values werent in lockstep. It wasnt  the atomic that needed to be barriered, it was the register its return value was being stored to, if that makes sense.

Also the only thing you'd need is an execution barrier but for some reason just a memory barrier fixed it too, but that just might be due to how NV compiler and HW works.

Reviewer 2: > I'm not clear why you'd want atomics to be a sync point though - what's the motivation for this?

This was a question about the assertion in the proposal that this might be needed.

Reviewer 2: > whats the opt out meachism from getting implicit subgroup control barrier and maximal reconvergence on all shaders and not have my Nvidia performance get nerfed due to not being able to use IPC ?

Barriers that don't actually order anything can be elided. A barrier at the branch point only really matters for the purpose of making sure you don't get stuff jumping out of the branch. If a branch doesn't include a relevant memory access, the HLSL compiler should omit the barrier.

In the SPIR-V memory model, a "relevant access" would any "non-private" access; similarly in HLSL this would be any atomic or coherent access only.

Reviewer 3: > Barriers that don't actually order anything can be elided. 

My issue isn't paying for barriers when there's nothing to be ordered.

Its more about accesses which look like they might be doing something that needs to be ordered but I didn't need them to be.

Sure the SPIR-V Aliasing rules really narrow down the set of accesses which could need ordering (except for BDA and SSBO, and workgroup if you explicitly lay it out), but those rules are extreme and there's quite a few problems with them as we've shown at SLS 2026.

> In the SPIR-V memory model, a "relevant access" would any "non-private" access; similarly in HLSL this would be any atomic or coherent access only.

hmmm, but in raw SPIR-V I can do OpLoad and OpStore with MakePointerAvailable and so on.

In fact I have to because VMM bans `Coherent` applied on a variable

On a SPIR-V level I'd expect those to be a "relevant access" if the storage class is non-private, especially that I'd avoid using OpAtomicLoad/OpAtomicStore when you don't have to worry about concurrent access (because there's none as clear happens-before relationships) and seeing partially updates values or having partial writes  as that would be like using a chainsaw for cutting grass.

Also there's a whole thing with OpAtomic only being usable on 4 byte types, and OpLoad/OpStore with MakeAvailable work on any type, and we suddenly get back to the nasty codegen for ByteAddressBuffers and friends that birthed the `untyped_pointer` extension to solve it

Reviewer 2: > Its more about accesses which look like they might be doing something that needs to be ordered but I didn't need them to be.

I think that warrants explicit tagging somehow. The default being safe I think is the better option.

> Sure the SPIR-V Aliasing rules really narrow down the set of accesses which could need ordering (except for BDA and SSBO, and workgroup if you explicitly lay it out), but those rules are extreme and there's quite a few problems with them as we've shown at SLS 2026.

SPIR-V aside, I think HLSL should define semantics for HLSL. Those should be well defined. Translating that to SPIR-V should be considered a separate problem.

> hmmm, but in raw SPIR-V I can do OpLoad and OpStore with MakePointerAvailable and so on.

> In fact I have to because VMM bans Coherent applied on a variable

I think we're digging into the weeds of SPIR-V too much for a HLSL proposal, but given you have to have NonPrivate alongside any AV/VIS flags I'm not sure what the problem is here?

Author: +💯 

> I think that warrants explicit tagging somehow. The default being safe I think is the better option.

Yes. This is one of our [codified design principles](https://github.com/hlsl-tc57/tc57/blob/main/docs/DesignConsiderations.md#portability-and-safety-by-default)!

> SPIR-V aside, I think HLSL should define semantics for HLSL. Those should be well defined. Translating that to SPIR-V should be considered a separate problem.

Yes. The goal in this spec is to define what the HLSL behavior should be. We have several members of TC57 who also participate in the Khronos SPIR and Vulkan working groups. We should define the language to enable user productivity and work through Khronos and the compiler implementers to ensure we can lower it to SPIRV (and DXIL).

> requires atomic operations to behave a sync points as well.

Reviewer: Not sure why that would be. It seems atomic ops allow for exactly that kind of chaotic access
